CVNP2646 - Week 6 Reflection
Tamara Arnott

GitHub Repository: https://github.com/tamara-arnott/CVNP2646-CourseWork/tree/main/week6
Video: [URL]

REFLECTION

Working through this project with Claude AI as a learning helper was essential. In addition to having it build the scanner, I used ai as a sounding board and asked questions and thought about how Claudeai writes the code and my role in understanding the various commands included - because both Python coding and cyber security are contain all new concepts for me I tried to learn more about how using ai in this type of work happens in the real world. It is difficult for me to imagine doing this type of work without having the support of ai. It would seem to be just about impossible for me to read or write lines of code without wanting to bang my head on a desk - it seems so tediuos. That said, I'm so grateful to be able to learn using Claudeai so that can skip the mind numbing synthax challenges and learn how to think and implement this powerful computer lanaguage.

One question I asked was "WHY LEARN THIS WHEN AI CAN DO IT?"

Early in the process I questioned the value of learning to write code that AI can already generate. Through our discussion I came to understand that the real skill isn't memorizing Python syntax. It's computational thinking - breaking a problem into steps: split this, filter that, count these, report those. If I can't understand what the code is doing, I can't tell when AI gets it wrong (although, it would seem like ai will not really get it wrong, it will just follow my own incorrect prompts which provide room for misinterpretation of my intent. 

The next question I asked was "WHAT WOULD A HUMAN ACTUALLY DO WITH THESE REPORTS?"

I asked Claude what a SOC analyst would do after receiving the scanner's output. This led to understanding the full incident response chain: blocking attacking IP addresses at the firewall, locking targeted accounts and forcing password resets, checking whether any attacker actually got in (I learned that when finding hundreds of FAILs followed by one SUCCESS from the same IP clearly indicates a serious security problem), enabling multi-factor authentication (to short circut malintent), and the need to set up automated blocking tools like Fail2Ban. The scanner built for this assignment is only the first step in the security chain - it finds the problem so humans and automated systems can stop it.

Reflecting on the way the report results are so full of detail, I wondered "WHO IS ACTUALLY READING THESS" and "Can human's really focus on this type of report effectively without getting slopply or distracted"?

This question ultimately was the most important because I'm trying to reconcile use of ai and need for human work at all in this type of activity. My question, about whether anyone would actually read these reports with their eyes and see problems has led to greater understanding of the cybersecruity process itself - using both eyes and code to stop problems as soon as they are noticied. Claude taught me that the JSON report is machine talking to machine - it feeds into SIEM tools like Splunk that automatically compare numbers against rules and trigger alerts. No human reads the JSON. The text report is what a human analyst reads AFTER the automated system has already flagged the problem. That's why the text report puts
the most critical information at the top - the analyst needs to understand the situation in about 5 seconds. Understanding this distinction made the project feel like real work instead of just an exercise.

I explored the question "CAN SECURITY BREACHES HAPPEN THROUGH MALFORMED LOG LINES?"

This was new information -- that code can become malformed naturally and that this type of system error can be used to exploit security systems. I learned that attackers can deliberately create malformed log entries to break scanners (log injection), flood logs with garbage to hide their real attack in lines the scanner never reaches (log evasion), or corrupt logs after a
breach to cover their tracks. This completely changed how I thought about error handling. It's not just about preventing crashes - it's about preserving evidence.

I asked Claudeai to explain "HOW CAN AN ANALYST TELL IF BAD LINES ARE CORRUPTION OR TAMPERING?"

After learning that malformed lines could be evidence of tampering, I asked how an analyst would actually investigate. I learned they look for patterns: Are the bad lines clustered around a suspicious time window? Are specific fields selectively missing (like just the IP address)? Do timestamps show gaps where lines might have been deleted? They also cross-reference with other sources like firewall logs, backup copies, and logs from other servers. Even if an attacker corrupts one log file, they would have to corrupt logs across multiple systems to
fully cover their tracks. It seems to me that problems / scripts could also flag these as well.

Finally, I decided that it was important to have the program log errors in two ways. Based on what I learned about tampering, I pushed to include both error counting (for the summary reports) and saving the actual bad lines to a separate parse_errors.log file. The count tells the report reader "3 lines had problems." The error log tells the investigator exactly which
lines failed and why. A scanner that silently skips bad lines could be hiding the most important evidence in the file. This was my own contribution to the project based on understanding the real-world context, not just following the assignment instructions.

To complete these assignments I lean heavily on CLAUDE AI

I used Claude as both a learning partner and a code generator. Our process was as follows: 

First, Claude walked me through each section of the web app, explaining concepts in plain language when the technical material was unclear due to my lack of previous education in this field of study.

Next, I asked questions throughout - not just "how does this work" but "why does this matter" and "what would a real person do with this."

I asked Claude to create quizzes for me on the concepts to make sure I understood the security context before we wrote the code. For example:

   Q: What happened in this log line?
      2024-11-25 08:30:12 event=LOGIN status=FAIL user=root ip=203.0.113.89 method=SSH
   My answer: On November 25, 2024 there was an attempted login which    failed. The user is root which is the master account for the entire system, and the IP address attempting the login     was 203.0.113.89. The method tried was SSH which is a way to connect to a computer remotely.

   Q: Three log lines show FAILs 3 seconds apart from the same IP, trying admin then root then admin. What pattern do you see?
   My answer: The attempts were exactly 3 seconds apart which looks like a script is running rather than a person. Each time the attempt failed. They tried the admin account twice then     
   switched to root which is the master account. The attack came from the same IP address. (Claude pointed out that the attempts were not 3 seconds apart but .3 sections apart)

   Q: An IP shows 500 FAILs followed by 1 SUCCESS. What happened?
   My answer: It appears the script determined the password and got into the system.

   Q: What should the counters show after processing those three FAIL lines?
   My first answer: 2 users, 1 IP address. Claude clarified: The counters track how many TIMES each one failed, not just how many unique names. So admin=2, root=1 for
   users, and the IP=3 because all three attempts came from there. That correction helped me understand the difference between counting unique items and counting occurrences.

Then I asked Claude to write the code. I did not write it myself. But we built it step by step - one function at a time - and tested each piece before moving on. I asked for explanations when I didn't understand something, like what "key" means in a dictionary.

After the code was written, Claude walked through it and I rewrote the comments in my own words based on my actual understanding. If I couldn't explain a comment, we rewrote it until I could.

The decision to log errors two ways (counting them for reports AND saving the bad lines to a separate file) came from my questions about the security context, not from the assignment requirements. This was my contribution to the design.

The biggest takeaway from this weeks assignment isn't about Python. It's that security tools exist in a chain - scanners find problems, SIEM tools raise alarms, analysts
investigate, and teams take action. Every design decision in the code (what to count, what to skip, what to save, what to report) connects to a real person doing a real job. Understanding that context made the code make sense in a way that just following instructions wouldn't have.

Thank you for allowing me to learn in this manner! Tamara
